Coyhaique_user_guide.md, before:

# How to run jobs in the group's computer, "coyhaique"

Slurm is not needed to run jobs remotely in coyhaique. Once a user is logged-in in
the cluster, any command and/or script can be run as in one local computer. The key
here are the permissions of each user. 

When executing any script/command in the terminal, is always recommended to append 
`nohup`. For example:

```
$ nohup bash my_script.sh &
$ nohup python my_code.py &
```

This will allow the program to keep running even when the terminal gets closed (unintentionally 
or not). The `&` is not needed, but it's useful because sends the process to the 
background, so one can continue to use the same terminal without having to wait for the 
command to finish.

# Resources

Cores: 32

Memory: 128 GB

Sytem disk: 500 GB SSD

Storage: 16TB raid 1+0 (10)


The computer has 32 cores and each core has 2 threads. `lscpu` reports
64 cpus, but that is the number of threads. 32 is the important number here. When 
running a job, it is the user responsability to know how many cores will be 
used by it. It is always possible to run `top`/`htop` to see how many cpus are being used.

The maximum amount of resources for each job depends on the particular circumstances, but it is
sensible to use no more than half of the resources if multiple users will be running jobs. This is
not a personal computer and users should always remember that.

# Storage

Use `lsblk` to see the partitions, their sizes and mount points.

Use `df -h` to see the storage used.

Use `du -shc /dir/path` to see the size of a directory.

## Big disk (16 TB)

Each user has to make a directory in `/mnt/DATA/` named after its user name, which will 
be used as its personal folder. **Users have to place most of their files here**.

### Databases

Most of the time databases should be shared among users. Databases are only read by programs (they don't modify them) 
and frequently are big (at least a few GBs). Databases should be placed in `/mnt/DATA/DBs`. In this folder, all the 
users have read and write permissions.

## System disk - SSD

This is mainly for software installation (only 500 GB)

- This disk has the operating system installed in it. Most of the the software installed by `dnf`/`yum` is placed in `/usr/bin/`. 
- inside `/home/{user-name}`, the users may install personal software. For example, users can
install anaconda and all its environments here.


### Anaconda

<https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/index.html>

Users may install most of the software using the `conda` software management, which is installed once the anaconda/miniconda software 
distribution is installed. It isn't mandatory to use the `/home/{user-name}` for the anaconda installation and users can always install 
it inside `/mnt/DATA/{user-name}`. 

After installing anaconda, users will need to set up the bioconda repository:

<https://bioconda.github.io/user/install.html>

About `conda`:

<https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/index.html>

`conda` can frequently take several minutes to solve the software dependencies. `mamba` is a faster alternative, which is compatible
with `conda`. 

check <https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba>

## About system updates

it is good practice to check first which software will be installed/upgraded before running `yum update`. Sometimes, given the importance of the software to be updated, may be sensible to update the system only when a user with admin permissions is present phisically where the computer is located, in case any problem arises after the updates.

## System rescue disk

In case the system cannot start a functional session, one can use a linux distribution to boot and repair the system. One distro that has been successfully used before is  **SystemRescue** (also known as SystemRescueCd) at <https://www.system-rescue.org/>.

## About SELinux

SELinux is a system to create and administrate permissions in the system. It has 2 different modes of operation, enforcing (default) or permissive. Run `sestatus` to see the current information about `selinux`. The configuration file is `/etc/selinux/config` and the the mode was changed to `SELINUX=permissive`, which should help with potential problems created by `SELINUX=enforcing`.

More info here:
https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html-single/using_selinux/index

Commit message:

Add info to coyhaique user guide

Coyhaique_user_guide.md, after:

# How to run jobs in the group's computer, "coyhaique"

Slurm is not needed to run jobs remotely in coyhaique. Once a user is logged-in in
the cluster, any command and/or script can be run as in one local computer. The key
here are the permissions of each user. 

When executing any script/command in the terminal, is always recommended to append 
`nohup`. For example:

```
$ nohup bash my_script.sh &
$ nohup python my_code.py &
```

This will allow the program to keep running even when the terminal gets closed (unintentionally 
or not). The `&` is not needed, but it's useful because sends the process to the 
background, so one can continue to use the same terminal without having to wait for the 
command to finish.

# Resources

Cores: 32

Memory: 128 GB

Sytem disk: 500 GB SSD

Storage: 16TB raid 1+0 (10)


The computer has 32 cores and each core has 2 threads. `lscpu` reports
64 cpus, but that is the number of threads. 32 is the important number here. When 
running a job, it is the user responsability to know how many cores will be 
used by it. It is always possible to run `top`/`htop` to see how many cpus are being used.

The maximum amount of resources for each job depends on the particular circumstances, but it is
sensible to use no more than half of the resources if multiple users will be running jobs. This is
not a personal computer and users should always remember that.

# Storage

Use `lsblk` to see the partitions, their sizes and mount points.

Use `df -h` to see the storage used.

Use `du -shc /dir/path` to see the size of a directory.

## Big disk (16 TB)

Each user has to make a directory in `/mnt/DATA/` named after its user name, which will 
be used as its personal folder. **Users have to place most of their files here**.

## Databases

Most of the time databases should be shared among users. Databases are only read by programs (they don't modify them) 
and frequently are big (at least a few GBs). Databases should be placed in `/mnt/DATA/DBs`. In this folder, all the 
users have read and write permissions.

## System disk - SSD

This is mainly for software installation (only 500 GB)

- This disk has the operating system installed in it. Most of the the software installed by `dnf`/`yum` is placed in `/usr/bin/`. 
- inside `/home/{user-name}`, the users may install personal software. For example, users can
install anaconda and all its environments here.


## Anaconda

<https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/index.html>

Users may install most of the software using the `conda` software management, which is installed once the anaconda/miniconda software 
distribution is installed. It isn't mandatory to use the `/home/{user-name}` for the anaconda installation and users can always install 
it inside `/mnt/DATA/{user-name}`. 

After installing anaconda, users will need to set up the bioconda repository:

<https://bioconda.github.io/user/install.html>

About `conda`:

<https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/index.html>

`conda` can frequently take several minutes to solve the software dependencies. `mamba` is a faster alternative, which is compatible
with `conda`. 

check <https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba>

# About system updates

it is good practice to check first which software will be installed/upgraded before running `yum update`. Sometimes, given the importance of the software to be updated, may be sensible to update the system only when a user with admin permissions is present phisically where the computer is located, in case any problem arises after the updates.

# System rescue disk

In case the system cannot start a functional session, one can use a linux distribution to boot and repair the system. One distro that has been successfully used before is  **SystemRescue** (also known as SystemRescueCd) at <https://www.system-rescue.org/>.

# About SELinux

SELinux is a system to create and administrate permissions in the system. It has 2 different modes of operation, enforcing (default) or permissive. Run `sestatus` to see the current information about `selinux`. The configuration file is `/etc/selinux/config` and the the mode was changed to `SELINUX=permissive`, which should help with potential problems created by `SELINUX=enforcing`.

More info here:
https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/8/html-single/using_selinux/index

# About system performance and disk use

Some times the performance of a process depends on the disk performance (I/O) and not the memory/cores available. Many times, e.g. when using big databases, reading the database(s) from the disk is the bottleneck. Some solutions involved moving the database(s) into a very fast disk, as a SSD, or put the DBs into a `tmpfs`/ `/dev/shm`, a temporal RAM disk, which is by default defined in modern Linux (see it with `df -h`). This is a RAM disk and can be re-mounted with a different size, but one has to consider the RAM used by the tasks running. Also, if multiuple users are running disk intensive tasks, one user can move the relavant files to another disk (`Lacie` or the SSD) while the other user uses the main RAID array. All the previous really only matters for big jobs, but it can make a really big difference in terms of running time in some cases. For relevant examples about this topic, check the `hhsuite` and `egnogg-mapper` wikis in github. 

<https://www.cyberciti.biz/tips/what-is-devshm-and-its-practical-usage.html>
